# Languages
- An **alphabet**, which will be denoted as $(\Sigma)$, is a finite, non-empty set of symbols. A **string** is a finite sequence of symbols from the alphabet.
	- You can think of it as the alphabet being the set while the string is a subset derived from the set.
- **Concatenation** is the process of combining two strings by adding the symbols in $v \rightarrow u$.
	- $w^n$ string obtained by concatenating $w$ for $n$ times
		- $w=\text{abc}$
		- $w^0=\lambda$
		- $w^1=w=\text{abc}$
		- $w^2=w\times w=\text{abcabc}$
		- etc...
- **Reverse** of a string $w$, usually denoted $w^R$, reverses the order of the string.
- **Length** of a string $w$ denoted as $|w|$ represents the number of symbols in the string.
- **Empty string**, denoted as $\epsilon$ or as $\lambda$, is a string that contains no symbols.  
- **Sub-string** of $w$ is a sequence derived from a string $w$
- **Closures** are a way of representing 'all' the possible concatenations of the alphabet provided with $\mathbf{\Sigma}$:
	- **Star-Closure**, denoted as $\mathbf{\Sigma^*}$, contains all strings obtained by concatenating 0 or more symbols in the alphabet, INCLUDING $\mathbf{\lambda}$
	- **Positive-Closure**, denoted as $\mathbf{\Sigma^+}$, contains all strings with symbols from the alphabet, EXCLUDING $\mathbf{\lambda}$ 
		- $\mathbf{\Sigma}=\text{\{a,b\}}$
		- $\mathbf{\Sigma^*}=\text{\{}\lambda \text{, a,b,aa,ab,ba,bb,aaa,...\}}$ 
		- $\mathbf{\Sigma^+}=\text{\{ a,b,aa,ab,ba,bb,aaa,...\}}$
## Formal Languages
- A language $L$ for an $\Sigma$, is a subset of $\Sigma^*$.
- A string within a $L$ is called a **sentence**.
- **Reverse of a language**, denoted $L^R$, reverses all strings in $L$.
- **Complement of a language**, denoted $\bar{L}$, is the set difference between the Star-Closure $(\Sigma^*)$ and the Language $(L)$
	- **Union, Intersection, and Difference** operations for languages are similar as for sets
- **Concatenation of two languages** is the combination of every string in $L_1 \text{ and } L_2$
	- $L^n$ is the language obtained by concatenating $L$, $n \text{ times}$.
		- $L^0=\lambda$
		- $L^1=L$
		- $L^2=LL$
		- etc...
# Grammar
Grammar is a **mechanism** used to describe the respective language $(L)$ and generate sentences. This mechanism is a tool used to tell us whether or not the sentence is well formed or not. 
A grammar $G$ is quadruple where $G=(V, \Sigma, R, S)$, where:
- $V$ is the **Variables**:
	- $<id>\;\rightarrow \;<letter><rest>$
	- $<rest> \; \rightarrow \; \text{\{<letter><rest>, <digit><rest>,} \lambda\}$
	- $<letter> \; \rightarrow \text{\{a,b,c,...,z\}}$
	- $<digit>\rightarrow{0,1,2,...,9}$
- $\Sigma$ is the finite set, disjoint from $V$, called the **terminals.**
	- This is the **alphabet** used to generate the language $(L)$.
- $R$ is the finite set of **rules**.
	- Each rules being a $V$ & a string of $V's$ and terminals
- $S\in V$ is the start variable.
Given that $G=(V, \Sigma, R, S)$, the language generated by $G$ is $L(G) = \{w\in\Sigma^*:s\rightarrow^*w\}$
## Example 1:
Find a language containing all identifiers, where an identifier contains only lower-case letters or digits; must start with a letter.
Generate the sentence: **b7**
$$
<id>\;\rightarrow
\;<letter><rest>\;\rightarrow
\;\text{b}<rest>\;\rightarrow
\;\text{b}<digit><rest>\;\rightarrow
\;\text{b}7<rest>\;\rightarrow
\;b7\lambda\;\rightarrow
\;b7
$$
Therefore the sentence **b7** has been properly generated with proper grammar rules.

## Example 2:
Given that:
- $G=(V,\Sigma,R,S)$
- $V=\{S\}$
- $\Sigma=\{a,b\}$
- $R:\begin{cases} S\rightarrow aSb \\ S\rightarrow \lambda \end{cases}$
What language does this grammar $(G)$ describe?
- The rule states that the starting variable $(S)$ must equal one of two things: $\{\lambda, aSb\}$.
- Using this rule we can derive that the starting variable **string** can equal:
	- $S=\lambda$
	- $S=aSb=a\lambda b=ab$
- Finally, we can utilize the these rules to generate another sentence by manipulating these rules:
	- $S=aSb=a(aSb)b=aaSbb=aa\lambda bb=aabb$
- $L(G)=\{a^nb^n:n\geq0,n\in Z\}$
	- Language, of Grammar $G$, consists of:
		- $a^n, b^n$ where $n\geq0$ and is within the set of all int's. 
## Example 3:
Find a grammar $G$ that generates the following language.
- $L(G)=\{ a^n b^{n+1}:n\geq0,n\in Z \}$
The formal definition of Grammar consists of:
$G=(V,\Sigma, R, S) \; \text{Where}$:
- $V=$ Variables
	- The only Variable needed to be considered is the String $(S)$
- $\Sigma=$ Alphabet
	- From within the definition of the $L(G)$ we can see that the only 'symbols' within the alphabet:
		- $\Sigma=\{a,b\}$
- $R=$ Rules
	- We can define the rules by considering different scenarios of $n$:
		- $n=0 \rightarrow a^0b^{0+1}=\lambda b=b$
		- $n=1 \rightarrow a^1b^{1+1} = a^1b^{1+1}=ab^2=abb$
	- Generalizing we can say that:
		- $R=\begin{cases} S\rightarrow b \\ S\rightarrow aSb \end{cases}$
			- We are **using $b$ as the terminator** for the sequence, NOT $\lambda$, therefore we use $aSb$. This will result in always having $a^nb^{n+1}$ (one extra b).
- $S=$ String
	- This is the string generated by following the rules $(R)$ of the given grammar:
		- $S=aSb | b$
We have successfully generated a Grammar $(G)$ that suffices $L(G)$.
## Example 4:
Find a grammar $G$ that generates the following language.
- $L(G)=\{ a^{2n}b^n:n\geq0,n\in Z \}$
To generate a grammar $G$ to suffice $L(G)$ we will define the formal definition:
$G=(V, \Sigma, R, S) \; \text{Where}$:
- $V=$ Variables
	- The only variable within $L(G)$ to consider is the String $(S)$
- $\Sigma=$ Alphabet
	- The only symbols within $L(G)$ are $\Sigma=\{a,b\}$
- $R=$ Rules
	- We can define the rules by considering different scenarios of $n$:
		- $n=0 \rightarrow a^{2(0)}b^0=a^0b^0=\lambda$
		- $n=1 \rightarrow a^{2(1)}b^{1}=a^2b^1=aab$
		- $n=2 \rightarrow a^{2(2)}b^2=a^4b^2=aaaabb$
	- By generalizing the scenarios above we can say:
		- $R=\begin{cases} S\rightarrow \lambda \\ S\rightarrow aaSb \end{cases}$
- $S=$ String
	- Considering the rules generated we can say:
		- $S=aaSb|\lambda$

# Automata
Automata is an **abstract model** for a digital computer; there are 5 main concepts to understand:
1) **Input File:**
	- Contains the input string
	- Cannot alter input
	- Processed from $\text{left}\rightarrow\text{right}$
2) **Storage:**
	- Infinite # of cell where each cell represents a symbol from the alphabet $\sum$.
		- Can be the same or different than the input alphabet.
	- Information can be altered.
3) **Control Unit:**
	- Contains the # of internal states
	- Transition function that decides the next internal state
	- Uses a **discrete time frame**
4) **Configuration:**
	- Current internal state, input file, & storage.
5) **Move:**
	- Transition from on configuration to another.

